Taste and Odour Receptors 3.1 Taste and Odour Receptors By Prof . Ciaran  Forde

Learning objectives Recognize and identify the different steps in the perception of volatile and taste compounds • The interaction between these compounds and the receptors • The signal transduction caused by binding of the compounds to the receptors • The perception of the brain after receiving the signals caused by these compounds Explain the role of saliva in odour and taste perception • The composition of the saliva • The function of the saliva and the activity of the salivary enzymes Know the role of memory and reward system in odour and taste perception and how this can be applied in the development of new food product.

Function of smell Smell has an evolutionary function. Food • Attraction towards a good smell (energy, pleasure, memory) • Repulsion towards a bad smell (rotten, contaminated) Social • Sexual attraction/repulsion towards a partner • Social acceptability (e.g. in public places like the underground) Safety • Early detection of risks (fire, burn, or gas) evolve into a detection system that is connected to alarms Diagnostic tool: pathological and physiological detection by breath analysis (metabolic syndrome, liver deceases,  food intolerance) • Dogs that can for example detect the smell of COVID-19 infections • Breath analysis by breathing into a tube that is connected to a measuring device (proton reaction mass spectrometry) Figure 30  Figure 47 Breath analysis in rats.

Food Flavour Design - 114

Taste and Odour Receptors Anatomy and physiology of the olfactory system (olfaction = smell) The nostril allows the entering of air and volatile compounds through the nose into the olfactory epithelium. This olfactory epithelium is situated in the nasal passage. The olfactory epithelium is separated from the brain by the cribiform plate, which is a piece of bone with holes. Right above the cribiform plate, between the brain and the cribiform plate, is an extension of the brain. This extension of the brain is the olfactory bulb. The olfactory bulb is a bundle of nerves, the cranial nerve that exits the brain. Small projections of this bundle of nerves go through the cribiform plate into the olfactory epithelium. Thousands of cells in the olfactory bulb send these nerve projections into the olfactory epithelium. In the olfactory epithelium, receptors are located on the end of these cell’s nerve projections. Each receptor is sensitive to one particular type of molecule, e.g. a benzene ring. This benzene ring can bind to the receptors of a specific olfactory sensory cells. These olfactory sensory cells  are located in between the other olfactory epithelium cells, e.g. mucus secreting cells. An extension of these olfactory sensory cell reaches through the holes of the cribiform plate into the olfactory bulb. On the inside of the olfactory epithelium, each olfactory sensory cell has a receptor that is sensitive to a specific molecule, e.g. a benzene ring. Multiple olfactory sensory cells have the same receptor that is sensitive to a specific molecule (ligand). When the receptor is activated though ligand binding, it will fire an action potential along the extension of the cell. The extensions of these cells assemble in a designation point in the olfactory bulb, called the glomerulus. In this glomerulus, the extensions of the olfactory sensory cells will synapse on a mitral/tufted cell . This mitral/tufted cell will continue signal transduction to the brain. A volatile compound, e.g. benzene ring, enters the olfactory epithelium in the nasal passage and binds to a receptor. This receptor is situated inside the membrane of the olfactory sensory cell. The receptors of olfactory sensory cell are G-Protein Coupled Receptors (GPCR’s). On the inside of the cell membrane, a G-protein is coupled to the receptor. After binding of the benzene ring to the receptor on the outside of the cell membrane, the G-protein is dissociated. The free G-protein will start a cascade of events on the inside of the cell. The G-protein can bind to an ion channel, that is located inside the cell membrane. After binding of the G-protein, the ion channel will open and allow positively charged ions to enter the cell. The influx of positive ions causes a depolarization of the cell which lead to the firing of an action potential.

Food Flavour Design - 115

Taste and Odour Receptors

Odor perception Humans have about 350 functional genes which are part of the family of olfactory genes. This family of genes can code for more than 1000 proteins (=receptors). However, there are even more volatile compounds than receptor types. As a result, different vola tile molecules will bind with a different affinity to the receptors. The affinity of a molecule towards receptor binding is determined by its molecular structure.

Figure 48 Odorant receptor binding. Human odour sensitivity varies for the different volatile compounds and between individuals. This sensitivity is influenced by certain physiological factors. Examples are the decreased sensitivity towards odours with age and higher sensitivity of woman com pared to men. The decreased sensitivity with age is mainly caused by tissue atrophy, resulting in a reduction of cells that are exposed to odours. Additionally, the size of the nose makes a difference in odour sensitivity. A larger volume in the nasal cavity is correlated with a higher odour detection ability. In animals, a larger volume of the olfactory bulb is correlated with higher odour identification ability. It is important to note that odour detection is caused by orthonasal (air that comes directly into the nasal cavity) and retronasal (via the mouth) odour detection.

Food Flavour Design - 116

Taste and Odour Receptors

A higher concentration of odour molecules (volatiles) activates more receptors or the same amount of receptors for a longer period of time. This could result in a stronger perception of the odour. A learning phase is coupled to smelling. For example: when you are smelling a rose, your brain processes the received signals and links them to the smell of a rose. In this link a combination is made between what we perceive, see, touch, etc. with our senses. The signal, belonging to a certain type of smell, arrives in the brain. As a results, in the brain a kind of map/image is formed that belongs to the signals originating from the volatile compounds of a specific smell. This map is different between indi viduals, but formed in the same brain area designated for odour recognition. The formed map is associated to a specific smell, e.g. rose and stored in memory. The next time that someone smells a rose, the same map is formed and the brain recognizes it as belonging to a rose. This formation of this map is not always precise, this explain why it is sometimes hard to individuals to recognize a certain smell.

Food Flavour Design - 117

Taste and Odour Receptors Functions of taste Taste is in a certain sense similar to smell. Sweet food products are accepted, while bitter/sour food product more often result in rejection. This acceptance/rejection reaction is part of our human nature. The other tastes, salt and umami, are connected to the human physiological needs. When the body registered a lack of ions, it will cause the person to experience a need for e.g. salt. The same applies for a lack of proteins, which can be linked to the umami taste. Humans possess all types of taste receptors. Some animals, however, do not have all taste receptors. Penguins for example lack the sweet receptor.

Figure 49 Taste and taste receptors through the years. Receptor discovery and cloning has rapidly evolved in the last twenty years. The gene sequences of these receptors are known, as well as their ligands. Additionally, the crystal structure of these receptors is known and can be used to design a compound tha t can enhance/prolonged receptor activation. Examples of such deigned compounds are sweeteners that strongly bind to the sweet receptor. Next to the standard receptors for sweet, salt, bitter, sour and umami, there are also taste receptors that can recognize other molecules, e.g. sodium bicarbonate. The presence of taste receptor differs between individuals, therefore, some individuals might be able to detect sodium bicarbonate. This could result in an increased liking of carbonated drinks.

Food Flavour Design - 118

Taste and Odour Receptors Another recent discovery, is the discovery of a taste receptor for fat. This has been caused by evolution, since humans originally did not possess such a taste receptor. In case of the presence of this fat taste receptor in the mouth, you can taste the fat  due to binding of free fatty acids to the receptor. An even more recent discovery is the human potential to taste starch. Oligosaccharides formed during starch breakdown in the mouth could bind to a receptor and result in the tasting of starch.

Anatomy and physiology of the taste system There a five main tastes: bitter, salty, sweet, sour and umami (glutamate), of which the receptors are localized on the tongue. The tongue contains taste buds, of which there are three types. Most taste buds are localized on the anterior part of the tongue. The taste buds on the anterior part of the tongue are fungiform taste buds. A second type of taste buds are the foliate taste buds, which are localized on the side of the tongue. The last type of taste buds is the circumvallate taste buds, which are localized on the back of the tongue. An individual taste bud is a pore containing all taste cells (for sweet, salty, sour, bitter and umami). Therefore, it is possible to taste all tastes throughout the tongue. A single taste cell in the taste bud is responsible for the recognition of one specific taste, e.g. sweet. A taste bud contains multiple taste cells that are each specialized to a certain taste. Each of these taste cells has an axon projecting from the cell. These dedicated axons remain separate and synapse in different parts of the brain. The axons of these cells synapse on different locations the gustatory (taste) cortex, the part of the brain that receives input from the various taste cells. However, all axons from sweet taste cells of different taste buds will synapse on the same location of the gustatory co rtex. This phenomena in which each axon of a taste cell separately transfers a signal to the gustatory cortex is called “the labelled lines model”. Each taste cell of a taste bud has little hairs extending on the surface of the tongue and one projecting axon. A specific taste cell, e.g. sweet taste cell, has receptors in its membrane to which certain molecules (ligands),

Food Flavour Design - 119

Taste and Odour Receptors e.g. glucose, can bind. These receptors are sensitive to a certain type of molecule, in the case of a sweet cells the receptor is sensitive to glucose. There are two types of taste receptors: the GPCR (sweet, umami and bitter) and the ion channel (sour and salty). The GPCR’s are inner membrane receptors. A ligand can bind to the receptor on the outside of the membrane, causing a conformational change of the receptor. This change in conformation causes a G -protein, that is coupled to the receptor on the insi de of the membrane, to dissociate. This dissociated G -protein can open ion channels via a conformational change. Due to the opening of the ion channels, ions can flow into the cell causing the cell the depolarize and resulting in the firing of an action po tential. Additionally to GPCR’s, ion channels in the cell membrane can function as receptors. The ligand, e.g. NaCl, can bind to the ion channel. This binding allows the ion channel to open and causes an influx of positive ions into the cell. As a consequence the cell depolarized and fired an action potential that goes to the brain. Not the receptor type, but the synapsing of the taste cell in the brain determines the taste belonging to the taste cell. Depolarization and firing of an action potential can be caused by any ligand -receptor binding combinations. Via the labelled lines model, this action potential is transferred to the brain. In the brain the location of the synapsing of the taste cell corresponds to the recognition of a certain taste. Therefore, a taste cell is sweet if the axon synapses on the sweet taste location of the gustatory cortex. If a receptor for glucose on a sweet taste cell is replaced by a receptor for NaCl, ligand -receptor binding will still result in a sweet taste perception.

The difference between smell and taste perception is the presence of the labelled lines model. For taste perception, the labelled lines model causes a direct signal transmission from the taste cell to the brain. For smell perception, the signal transmission goes via an intermediate synapse (the glomerulus with mitral/tufted cells).

Food Flavour Design - 120

Taste and Odour Receptors In taste perception, there is the possibility of introducing taste enhancers. These taste enhancers are compounds that are able to facilitate the binding of the taste molecules to the receptor. This function of the taste enhancers in quite effective in the case of the labelled lines model. How complimentary the ligand is, determines its affinity for binding with the receptor. Strong binding of the ligand with the receptor causes a continuous activation of the receptor. Ligand with weak binding can be washed away with the saliva and result in less activation of the receptor.

Besides the taste receptors in the papillae (containing the sensory receptors for taste) of the tongue, there is a second system involved in taste perception, the trigeminal system. The trigeminal system is a system of nerves that innervate the tongue and papillae. The nerves are sensitive to more physical types of signals. For example, the temperature, hot/cold, of the food. The receptors belonging to this system are Transient Receptor Potential (TRP) ion channels. These TRP receptors can also be sensitive  to other compound besides the sensation of hot/cold. The compounds with the ability to bind to these receptors interfere with the signaling of these receptors. An example is the binding of capsaicin of red pepper to TRPV1, which registers hotness. The trigeminal system is important and mainly related to temperature. This temperature relation should be considered for food products. For instance, cold ice cream and hot tea are perceived less sweet due to interaction of the temperature with the taste receptor. The receptors for temperature and taste are located on the same physical place on the papillae, causing the interference.

Food Flavour Design - 121

Taste and Odour Receptors

Next to the perception of salt, sour, and heat, the ion channel is also part of the PIEZO receptor. The functionality of these receptors is similar to the heat receptor in the mouth. These receptors are activated by pressure. They are present in the skin, joints, and organs. Proprioception, the sense of self-movement, force, and body position, is governed by the PIEZO receptors. The activation of these receptors by pressure and touch highlights their importance during sensory perception. Next to their role in proprioception and sensory perception, these receptors could also contribute to satiety. Distension of the stomach, when the stomach is full, could activate the PIEZO receptor and trigger a signaling pathway to the brain. This could influence the feeling of satiety.

Saliva: its composition and role in flavour release The saliva is a functional fluid that consists for 99% out of water. The main functioning protein in saliva is mucin. Mucin is a gelling glycoprotein causing the filament formation and gel like structure of the saliva. Besides mucin, saliva contains many m ore proteins. Some of these proteins can be used for diagnostic purposes.

Food Flavour Design - 122

Taste and Odour Receptors

Saliva contains α-amylase and lipase. The α -amylase can be produced by the salivary glands. There is no consensus yet regarding the origin of lipase in saliva. These lipases could be of microbial origin, produced in the oral cavity, or a result of refluxed gastric contents (Lai et al., 2019) ). In the saliva, sugars are partially hydrolyzed by the amylase, e.g. the partial hydrolysis of starch into shorter chain oligosaccharides. Additionally, triacyl glycerides (TAG’s) are partially hydrolyzed by lipase into free fatty acids. The action of these enzymes is not significant for digestive purposes due to the short residence time of food in the mouth (20-30 s). These enzymes are present in the mouth for signaling purposes. The activity of these enzymes can aid in the sweetness or fattiness perception of food in the mouth. In addition to the fattiness perception, the effect of the free fatty acids perception on reward and satiety has been considered. It is currently studied whether these free fatty acids could tr igger reward and satiety in the brain through the endocannabinoid pathway (Menalla et al., 2018). This would involve free fatty acid induced activation of certain in-mouth receptors and the production of endocannabinoids by these receptors. The exact mechanism behind the influence of these endocannabinoids on the brain remains unknown and it is a fascinating area of investigation.

Food Flavour Design - 123

Taste and Odour Receptors

The saliva is fundamental for the availability of taste compounds. Taste compounds will dissolve in the salivary fluid and become available for binding to the receptors. The extent of the solubility of these taste compounds will determine their availability for the receptors. To illustrate the importance of saliva, an example is used that shows cultural differences in flavour perception between individuals. During a sensory study, it was found that Chinese participants had a higher sweetness and flavour perception (menthol) compared to Caucasian participants after chewing. The Chinese participants showed a higher concentration of volatile flavour compounds in the retronasal cavity compared to the Caucasian participants. This could have been caused by a higher capability of the s aliva of the Caucasian participant to entrap the flavour compounds. These findings could have an important contribution to the food product development for markets of different cultures. This could lead to tail ored product formulations for different markets.

Food Flavour Design - 124

Taste and Odour Receptors Olfactory memory Olfaction, taste perception, is based on experience. By being exposed to a certain taste, it is also possible to couple this taste to a certain memory. Upon a follow up exposure, your brain will make the connection between the taste signal and the memory, a memory from the past. For example, the writer Marcel Proust who associated the smell of a madeleine (kind of small cake) with his mom’s madeleine from his childhood.

Food Flavor strategies to design satiating foods Can flavour strategies be used to influence the behaviour of people? Flavours or compounds can induce a physiological response or trigger a certain type of food perception. Visual stimulation can affect physiological reactions. Seeing a food can cause your salivary glands to start producing saliva. This reaction is already preparing the body to receive the food, even if the food will not be eaten. How do these responses influence satiety or desire to eat, and can these responses be controlled and used for food product development?

Food Flavour Design - 125

Taste and Odour Receptors Flavours produced in the Maillard reaction, Maillard Reaction (MR) flavours, are usually perceived as pleasant by consumers. Consumers are attracted to these flavours and therefore also the food products carrying these flavours. Besides their pleasantness, these flavours have shown to be able to change the eating behaviour and hormonal status in rats.

References Buck, L. B. (2004). Olfactory receptors and odor coding in mammals. Nutrition reviews, 62(suppl_3), S184-S188. Chandrashekar, J., Hoon, M. A., Ryba, N. J., & Zuker, C. S. (2006). The receptors and cells for mammalian taste. Nature, 444(7117), 288-294. Khanacademymedicine. (2013, October 25). Gustation - structure and function | Processing the Environment | MCAT | Khan Academy [Video]. YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vp1X7_u3KU Khanacademymedicine. (2013, October 25). Olfaction - structure and function | Processing the Environment | MCAT | Khan Academy [Video]. YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5McqAO8_Qw Lai, W. Y. W., Chua, J. W. M., Gill, S., & Brownlee, I. A. (2019). Analysis of the lipolytic activity of wholesaliva and site-specific secretions from the oral cavity of healthy adults. Nutrients, 11(1), 191. Mennella, I., Di Monaco, R., Balazy, A., Ferracane, R., Miele, N. A., Cavella, S., & Vitaglione, P. (2018). Salivary endocannabinoids and N-acylethanolamines upon mastication of a semisolid food: implications in fat taste, appetite and food liking. Food & function, 9(1), 476-484. Nature Portfolio. (2018, April 11). Perception of flavour is more than meets the tongue [Video]. YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=50EtSSzLnb8

Food Flavour Design - 126