Impact of oral processing behaviour and physiology 3.2 Impact of oral processing behaviour and physiology By Markus Stieger (FQD)

Learning objective • Explain and describe how behavioural factors influence flavour release and perception during food. • Explain and describe how physiological factors influence flavour release and perception during food consumption.

Content • Oral physiological processed during food consumption • Inter-individual differences in eating behaviour: influence of oral processing behaviour on flavour release and perception (masticatory behaviour, velum opening/closing, bolus properties, chewing/sucking/melting)

Oral physiological processes during food consumption During eating, the mouth opens to allow the food to enter. In the mouth, the food will be masticated by the teeth and pushed between the tongue, which is a muscle, and the palate before swallowing. The palate is the roof of the mouth consisting out of two parts: the hard palate and the soft palate (also called velum). The hard palate is the anterior part of the palate located at the front of the mouth. The velum is a flexible organ located at the back of the mouth. The velum can move downwards towards the t ongue forming a tonguevelum barrier, sealing off the oral cavity from the nasal cavity. When the velum touches the tongue, the oral cavity is closed off and prevents the food from entering the pharynx and esophagus. This also prevents volatile compounds from the food to enter the nasal cavity. Volatile compounds can enter the nasal cavity by two routes: the orthonasal route and the retronasal route. During the orthonasal route, volatile compounds enter the nasal cavity through the nostrils which occurs when sniffing foods or opening a food package. During the retronasal route, volatile compounds that are released from the food in the mouth can migrate into the nasal cavity. This migration is only possible if the velum does not touch  the tongue. Volatile compounds, coming from both routes, reach the olfactory epithelium, on top of the nasal cavity, and subsequently trigger a smell sensation. After swallowing, the food enters the pharynx. The pharynx consists out of three different sections and is connected to the esophagus and trachea. The esophagus is a muscular tube through which the food is transported to the stomach. The trachea is the win dpipe, which is used for breathing and speaking. The windpipe can be closed off from the pharynx by the epiglottis. The epiglottis is a flexible organ, located above the trachea. The flexible organ can move downwards during swallowing, sealing off and preventing food from entering the trachea.

Food Flavour Design - 127

Impact of oral processing behaviour and physiology

Using magnetic resonance imaging, it is possible to obtain a visualization of the swallowing process of a food. In the example below, the participant lays on its back in the MRI scanner. Liquid food is pumped into the oral cavity. In the supine position, the tongue needs to be pushed against the palate to be able to swallow the food all at once. The food is swallowed by pushing the food from the front to the back of the oral cavity, towards the pharynx and into the esophagus. During the act of swallowing, t he trachea is sealed off by the epiglottis. Before swallowing, the velum-pharynx border prevents the food from entering the pharynx and subsequently the esophagus. The velum-pharynx border is formed when the velum touches the tongue and seals off the oral cavity. After swallowing, the velum-pharynx border opens and breathing is made possible again. Due to the air inflow during breathing, the volatile flavour compounds that are still in the pharynx will be pushed upwards into the nasal cavity. This will caus e an intense flavour sensation and influences both the intensity and moment of flavour perception.

Food Flavour Design - 128

Impact of oral processing behaviour and physiology During the bolus uptake and beginning of the bolus transport (a&b) the velum-pharynx border is closed and all food is stored in the oral cavity. When the velum -pharynx border is closed, it is not physically possible for a volatile compound to migrate from the oral cavity into the nasal cavity. At the moment of swallowing (c), the velum-pharynx border opens and the food is transported via the pharynx to the esophagus (d&e). After swallowing (f), both the epiglottis and the velum do no longer form a barrier. The lack of both barriers allows the volatile flavour molecules in the pharynx to enter the nasal cavity. In the nasal cavity these volatile flavour compounds can trigger a flavour/smell sensation. A physiological and physical requirement for flavour perce ption is the entering of volatile flavour compounds into the nasal cavity. This is what happens during swallow breath, when volatile flavour compounds migrate from the pharynx into the nasal cavity after swallowing and subsequent breathing. Swallow breath results in a burst in flavour perception.

In open position, the velum does not touch the tongue. In magnetic resonance imaging, the area in between the velum and the tongue is of a lower grey intensity compared to the two organs. Whether the velum touches the tongue or not determines the opportuni ty of aroma compound transfer to the nasal cavity. During swallow breath, open velum, this transfer is high.

Food Flavour Design - 129

Impact of oral processing behaviour and physiology

The velum-tongue border has a central role in the influence of the swallowing process on retronasal aroma stimulation. This border can occasionally be open during eating and/or drinking, allowing for aroma compounds (volatiles) to travel from the oral cavity to the nasal cavity. This aroma compound transfer can trigger a smell sensation and induce flavour perception during mastication. After swallowing, the epiglottis and velum-pharynx border are both open. During exhalation, volatile compounds are conveyed to the nasal cavity and induce an intense aroma perception.

Inter-individual differences in eating behaviour: Influence of oral processing behaviour on flavour release and perception The concentration of a volatile compounds can be measured in the nasal cavity of a person during mastication using PTRMS. The release of flavour compounds into the nasal cavity can, due to physiological reasons, be different between individuals. This could cause differences in the intensity of aroma perception between individuals during the consumption of the same food. Some individuals only experience this flavour release after swallowing, while other individuals already experience this release during mastication. If a person experiences flavour release into the nasal cavity during mastication, the velum -tongue barrier must occasionally have been in open position. During the moments in which the velum-tongue barrier was in open position, the volatiles were able to reach the nasal cavity. This results in an increase in concentration of the volatile compounds in the nasal cavity over time. For those individuals that experience flavour release after swallowing, the velum -tongue barrier must have been in closed position during the entire time of mastication. This closed position of the barrier prevents the aroma compounds from entering the nasal cavity. Due to this inter individual difference in release of flavour compounds, there is a related difference in experienced aroma intensity during flavour perception. During mastication, those individuals of which the velum-tongue barrier occasionally opens, exp erienced a higher flavour perception. After swallowing, this group of individuals still experienced a higher flavour perception compared to those individuals of which

Food Flavour Design - 130

Impact of oral processing behaviour and physiology the velum-tongue barrier remained closed during the entire mastication time which is not what is expected to be observed. However, the difference in flavour perception, between occasionally open compared to closed velum-tongue barrier, becomes smaller after swallowing. The difference in the perception of aroma intensity after swallowing, in which those individuals with occasional opening of the velum -tongue barrier still had a higher flavour perception, was against expectations. The physiological release data showed that the individuals, of which the velum-tongue barrier was closed during the entire mastication time, had a higher concentration of volatile aroma compounds in the nasal cavity. Though this was not supported by the aroma sensitivity data. Other studies did ho wever show this relation. The opening and closing of the velum-tongue barrier is an involuntary process that occurs naturally during consumption. Individuals are not able to control this process. It is, however, possible to learn how to control this process. For example, profession al wine tasters, who evaluate flavour properties of wines, train themselves into consciously opening and closing of the velum-tongue barrier.

During mastication, the concentration of individual volatile aroma compounds, as a result of flavour release, can be measured in the nasal cavity. The measured concentration of the volatile aroma compound can show different trends over time between individuals. This would indicate inter individual differences in the release of this volatile aroma compound during mastication. These differences in release of the volatiles could result in differences in aroma perception. The inter individual differences, regar ding the release of this volatile aroma compound during mastication, are consistent across different volatile aroma compounds. This means that an individual with a high release of compound A also has a high release of compound B, while an individual with a low release of compound A also has a low release of compound B. The inter individual differences in release of this volatile aroma compound during mastication, could have various causes. Firstly, the opening and closing of the velum -tongue border could affect the release. Secondly, the release could be affected by the mastication time. Thirdly, the extent of breakdown of the

Food Flavour Design - 131

Impact of oral processing behaviour and physiology food during mastication, could affect the release. The release is increased by a larger extent of breakdown due to an increase in surface area of the food from which more volatile compounds can be released into the saliva or nasal cavity and trigger a response.

A higher chewing activity leads to a higher release of volatile aroma compounds. This higher release is probably caused by mechanical breakdown of the food during mastication. A higher chewing activity results in more extensive breakdown of the food. The food is broken down into a larger number of smaller pieces, increasing the total surface area of the food and subsequently increasing the flux of volatile compounds from the food matrix into the headspace (nasal cavity). Both the maximum (C max) and total am ount (expressed as area under the curve (AUC)) of released volatile aroma compound positively correlate with chewing intensity.

Food Flavour Design - 132

Impact of oral processing behaviour and physiology The positive correlation between both the maximum and total amount of released volatile aroma compound with chewing intensity, is expected. The more you chew, the more the food is broken down, the more and the smaller bolus particles are formed, the more volatile aroma compounds are being released. Despite this general expectation, some studies have also showed a negative correlation. This negative correlation could be linked to situations with a higher chewing intensity leading to shorter mastication time. A higher chewing intensity might lead to a lower release of volatile aroma compounds into the oral cavity although bolus breakdown is increased, since total oral processing time (mastication time) is reduced.

A variety of food bolus properties could be correlated with measures of eating behaviour. These measures of eating behaviour include for example the chewing activity, number of chews, chewing time, mouth coating (how much food is left in the mouth) and the composition of the saliva. Masticatory behaviour refers to how long and how effective the person chews. The masticatory behaviour parameters are those that influence flavour release the most.

Food Flavour Design - 133

Impact of oral processing behaviour and physiology When the aim of a study is to compare the volatile aroma release of different foods, inter individual differences (variability) should be minimized. This variability can be removed from the study by applying fixed mastication protocols. In such protocols, the participants are instructed to chew with a certain frequency for a certain time period. This chewing frequency and mastication time are the same for all participants. This will minimize the effect of oral behaviour on the release of volatile aroma comp ounds. By minimizing the effect of oral behaviour on the release of volatile aroma compounds, the effect of the food product on the release of volatile aroma compounds is maximized. This includes maximizing the effect on aroma perception. Alternatively, a chewing simulator, an artificial devices that mimics the chewing process of humans, can be used to exclude any effect of individual differences on flavour release. Therefore, it is possible to completely focus on the effect of the product on flavour release.

Eating behaviour (the way in which people consume/eat a food product) could have an impact on the flavour release and might affect the flavour perception. If a person chews on a food, there is a short burst in the release of volatiles. If a person sucks on  a food, there is a prolonged release of volatiles. During the prolonged release, the concentration of volatiles in the headspace remains high for a longer period of time.

Food Flavour Design - 134

Impact of oral processing behaviour and physiology Besides the eating behaviours chewing and sucking, it is also possible to let the food melt in mouth without manipulating it (i.e. think of a piece of chocolate in the mouth that a consumer lets melt slowly). Melting is an oral processing behaviour during which the food is placed in the mouth (on the tongue) and melts without additional mastication (chewing). Due to the lack of mastication, the time until swallowing is prolonged during melting. The hardness of a food affects the mastication time. The harder the food, which corresponds to a higher storage modulus (G’), the longer the mastication time. Chewing a food such as a gelatine gel reduces the time it spends in mouth compared to letting the food melt in mouth.

Chewing, compared to melting, causes a faster/earlier and shorter/sharper release of volatile aroma compounds. The time that the food stays in the oral cavity is influenced by the way the food is masticated, which in return influences the release (kinetics) of the volatile aroma compound.

Food Flavour Design - 135

Impact of oral processing behaviour and physiology Chewing and melting have a different impact on flavour perception of a food. Flavour perception is influenced by the intensities of different volatile aroma compounds. The intensities of these volatiles can change over time. The volatile compound with the highest intensity at a certain moment in time can be referred to as the dominant sensation. Both the intensity and moment of perception of the volatile aroma compound are influenced by the oral processing behaviour. Chewing could cause an earlier and more intense perception of certain volatile aroma compounds. Increased mastication is accompanied by an increased number of chews, resulting in a faster and higher release of volatile aroma compounds within a shorter period of time. The onset, extend and durati on of the release of the volatile aroma compounds influences the flavour perception.

References Flavour: From food to perception, First Edition. Edited by Elisabeth Guichard, Christian Salles, Martine Morzel, and Anne-Marie Le Bon.  © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. • Chapter 10, 11 and 12 • All cited publications

Food Flavour Design - 136

Module 4 – Measuring Flavours in foods

Module 4 – Measuring Flavours in foods

Food Flavour Design - 137