Static and dynamic sensory methods for flavour assessment 4.1 Static and dynamic sensory methods for flavour assessment By Prof . Markus Stieger  and  Dr. Arianne van Eck

Learning objective Obtain an overview of static and dynamic sensory methodologies. • For each discussed method, the student should be able to: o Describe the method o What the purpose is of using the method o Explain how to setup and perform the method o Decide the best method to use for specific data generation o Interpret the data obtained using the certain method Content • Discrimination methods: Paired comparison tests (2-AFC) • Quantitative Descriptive Analysis (QDA) • Time Intensity profiling (TI) • Temporal Dominance Sensations (TDS)

Introduction Sensory evaluation methods can be applied in different areas. For example, sensory methods can be used by a company for quality assurance purposes or to establish specifications for a product. The sensory evaluation, be a sensory panel, determines whether a product is acceptable, according to its quality standards, to be released into the market. This sensory evaluation is carried out for new products and different batches of existing product. Sensory evaluation can also be used to solve off -flavour problems, e.g. lipid oxidation in dairy foods. Moreover, sensory evaluation is important in new product or flavour development, and sometimes can play a role in claim substantiation. Furthermore, sensory evaluation is used to detect the influence of environment factors on the perception of a certain food product. In case the product is intended to target a specific market section, e.g. elderly or children, sensory perception of a food product plays a crucial role during the developmental phase. Sensory methodologies are the only available tool to obtain insights into the differences in perception and the acceptance of products by specific target groups. By using these sensory methodologies, it is possible to relate sensory differences to product properties. All sensory methods can be classified into three classes. The first class is the discriminative sensory methods. Discriminative sensory methods are analytical sensory evaluations and look in to the difference between products. For discriminative sensory methods, an either trained or untrained panel is used which is screened for acuity. The second class is the descriptive sensory methods. Descriptive sensory methods are also analytical sensory evaluations with a similar type of panel used. The difference is that descriptive sensory methods quantify the sensory properties in which products differ. The third class is the affective

Food Flavour Design - 138

Static and dynamic sensory methods for flavour assessment sensory methods, hedonic testing. Affective sensory methods look into the acceptance and/or liking of the product using an untrained panel that is screened for their use of the speficic product. Another way to classify sensory methods is based on their tim e resolution. Static sensory methods evaluate the sensory properties of a food at one moment in time, tyically after a bite of a sample has been tasted. Dynamic sensory methods evaluate senosry properties of a food while it is consumed, so dynamic methods illustrate changes in perception over time during consumption.

Static sensory methods Discriminative tests Discrimination tests should be used when the sensory specialist wants to determine whether two samples are            perceptibly different. These tests should be used when the perception differences between products are small, subtle and/or difficult to describe. In one discrimination test, a maximum of two samples can be compared. A series of discriminations tests could be used in order to test up to six/seven different samples. For testing more samples, using discriminative tests become very laborious. I n the field of research, e.g. psychophysics, the discrimination tests are used to determine taste/smell/texture sensitivity. In the industry, discrimination tests are used for product development and quality assurance, for example to assess the quality of a certain batch compared to a reference product. After performing the discriminative tests, statistical significance testing is used to analyze the obtained data and determine whether or not samples are different. Discrimination tests can be well used to detect differences between products with a similar overall flavour, texture and appearance, e.g. to determine differences between Coca Cola zero and Coca Cola light. If the products are obviously different, e.g. plain yogurt vs. peach yogurt, discrimination tests should not be used. The most commonly used discriminative tests are the paired comparison test and the triangle test. For both test varieties, three digit codes are used as sample identifier. In the paired comparison test, also called 2 Alternative Forced Choice test (2 -AFC), two samples are compared using a directional question (which sample is sweeter, thicker, creamier, etc.). The participant is forced to make a choice, or best guess, between the samples for the directional question. In the triangle test there are three sam ples tested of which two samples are the same and one sample is different. The participant is forced to choose, or guess, which sample is different from the other two.

Figure 50 Paired comparison and triangle test.

Food Flavour Design - 139

Static and dynamic sensory methods for flavour assessment For the paired comparison test, in which two samples are compared, the chance level of guessing the right answer is 50%. Therefore, during your data analysis, the significance of the data should be tested against a chance level of p = 0.5. Using a 2 -AFC, it can be determined which sample is significantly different, e.g. more intense, compared to the other sample(s) regarding one specific attribute.

Using the triangle test, it is possible to determine whether or not there is a difference between two samples. However, the triangle test does not reveal what the sensory difference between samples is, so it does not show whether the difference is in taste , texture, mouthfeel, or smell. By using three samples, the chance level of guessing is p = 0.33. During the data analysis, the significance of the data is tested against this chance level. A value above 0.33 indicates a significant difference.

Discriminative tests can be used in product development. Sugar and fat reduction in products can be achieved over a long period of time during which the sugar /fat content is decreased using small reductions. These gradual reductions are used to try and prevent consumers from perceiving a noticeable difference in the product composition as a consequence of the lower sugar/fat content. As a result of this gradual reduction, consumers learn to like and accept the new product formulations with the lower sugar/fat content. This approach in reduction does not require the replacement of sugar or fat by other ingredients. The approach is called “reduction by stealth”. This allows food manufacturers to achieve a significant reduction

Food Flavour Design - 140

Static and dynamic sensory methods for flavour assessment of a specific ingredient over time. This is most effective when all manufactures of a specific product category participate in this approach. This approach has been successfully used in the past in some countries to achieve sugar and salt reductions in certain food products. The use of the triangle test can be illustrated on the basis of an example in which either sugar or fat reduction was performed in mufffins. The muffins to be testes, all had a similar appearance. Therefore, it was possible to use a discriminative test, here triangle test, to investigate whether differences could be detected between the regular and fat reduced muffins.

The chance level of a triangle test is 33%. In order to determine whether the performed reduction resulted in a significant difference from the reference sample, a significance value of 0.05 was used, which is based on the number of participants that corre ctly identify the odd sample in a triangle. Based on the available data and used significance level, it could be concluded that a 40% reduction in fat and a 15% reduction in sugar did not result in a noticeable difference in perception between the fat reduced muffin and the reference muffin and between the sugar reduced muffin and the reference muffin. These reduction levels will therefore not be noticed by consumers. This would suggest that a relatively large reduction in fat is possible without causing a perceivable difference in the product.

Food Flavour Design - 141

Static and dynamic sensory methods for flavour assessment The discrimination tests will determine whether there is a difference between sample, however, from these tests it cannot be deduced what this difference is. The cause/origin of this difference can be investigated using descriptive sensory analysis. Descriptive tests Descriptive sensory analysis provides a quantitative measure of sensory properties for a set of products. It is possible to compare a set of 10 products on a variety of sensory properties (taste, smell, visual appearance and texture). This will result in a full quantitative description of all sensory properties of a set of products. During the descriptive tests, measuring scales are used to obtain quantitative data on the perceived intensity of different sensory attributes for different products. Different approaches can be used for descriptive sensory testing, including Quantitative Descriptive Analysis (QDA), spectrum method, Check -All-ThatApply (CATA) and Rate -All-That Apply (RATA). The latter two are relatively new approaches and here only QDA is discussed. For QDA and spectrum method, trained subjects are used instead of naive consumers. Trained subjects are people who come together on a regular basis, often once or twice a week, to evaluate the sensory properties of foods using QDA and have been trained to evaluate the sensory properties of foods. This training can focus on different aspects of performing sensorial evaluations. The use of the intensity scale, that is used to describe the sensory properties, and clear understanding of the sensory terms are pa rt of this training. This training should result in a consensus between panel members regarding these sensory terms. Both trained subjects and naive consumers will be able to understand the sensory term sweetness if described as being the taste of sugar. However, for flavour attributes, e.g. peppermint or spearmint, the difference between the attributes can become more difficult to understand for a naive consumer. To properly evaluate these flavour attributes, subjects should be trained to understand the definition of these attributes. These trained subjects should also be able to differentiate between the different attributes and thereby be able to independently evaluate the different attributes. The development of these skills in trained subjects takes yea rs, but once established could provide solid QDA data in, for example, product development. Due to the use of a trained panel, QDA can be considered both an accurate and time consuming method. A strong advantage of QDA is that the descriptive analysis can often be directly linked to product properties. The goal in using quantitative descriptive analysis it to provide a full description of all the sensory properties of a set foods/samples. In this full description, the appearance, taste, aroma, texture and sound perception of the foods/samples are described. But there are also variations of QDA available, that focus on providing a quantitative description only of the sensory texture of products (Texture profile analysis) or only of the flavour of products. Once the flavour of specific products has been described, e.g. wine, it can subsequently be used in the descriptive analysis of the product. For wine, the flavour description can be presented in an aroma wheel. The center of the wheel shows the categories of typically occurring wine flavours. In the next ring, a discrimination of different flavours within a category is presented. The outer ring contains the attributes that can be used to describe the flavour of wine, also called descriptors. The strength of  such an aroma wheel and corresponding descriptors, is that it can be used across studies. The use of the same descriptors and definitions across studies, allows for a better comparison between studies.

Food Flavour Design - 142

Static and dynamic sensory methods for flavour assessment

Figure 51 Aroma wheel with flavour descriptors for wine QDA was developed in 1970’s by Stone and Sidel. Due to the use of a trained panel, less subjects are required for the sensory analysis. A panel of 10 – 12 subjects will suffice to collect accurate data. These panel members have reached a consensus with respect to attribute generation and attribute use. They should be able to recognize and discriminate between different aromas/tastes. They should also be skilled in using line scales for sensory evaluation. A line scale is a 100 mm line, which is anchored on both sides with a certain intensity for a specific attribute. For each sample, the subject should indicate the intensity of the attribute on the line scale. A large number (up to 30) and wide variety (taste, smell, mouthfeel and appearance) of attributes can be used during QDA to describe a food. Sometimes, the use of a reference or standard product can be included in the evaluation to monitor the performance of the panel over time or to obtain a more quantitative measure on the extend of the deviation betw een the evaluated product and the standard.

Figure 52 Line scale (100 mm) used for sensory analysis. QDA can be used for a wide variety of attributes, products or selections of attributes/products. A selection of attributes can be made and used to, for example, focus on the flavour of a product. Perceptual dumping is usually avoided by offering typically >15 attributes. By performing a QDA, relative sensory intensity differences between samples are obtained. QDA, however, does not results in absolute values, usually comparisons are made between samples or relatively to a reference sample. Moreover, the int ensity of the samples are indicated on the line scale relatively to the used minimum and maximum intensity of the specific attribute.

Food Flavour Design - 143

Static and dynamic sensory methods for flavour assessment Spiders webs are a commonly used as visual representation to present QDA data. In the spider web, differences between samples are visualized for multiple attributes. Statistical analysis of the QDA data is usually performed using an analysis of variance (A NOVA) followed by PostHoc testing. Significant differences between samples for an attribute can subsequently be indicated in the spider web by stars. The stars denote that there is a significant difference between samples for an attribute but the stars do not specify which samples are different.

Dynamic sensory methods Dynamic sensory methods are important to identify changes in sensory perception over time. Sensory perception is dynamic and changes throughout consumption. During food oral processing (mastication), the food is chewed, broken down and mixed with saliva. Oral processing is needed in order to swallow the food. During mastication, the food bolus is hydrated, fragmented, exposed to temperature changes, etc. All these different aspects of food oral processing and mastication affect the sensory perception of tas te, smell and texture. Time intensity methods In time intensity (TI) methodology, the intensity of a single attribute (taste, aroma, texture, etc.) is measured over time. The subject continuously moves the position of an marker on the line scale according to the perceived intensity of the attribute of  a product at that moment in time. As a result of this continous movement of the marker position,  a time-intensity curve (TI curve) is obtained. These TI curves can differ between foods.

Food Flavour Design - 144

Static and dynamic sensory methods for flavour assessment

TI captures dynamic aspects of perception with a high time resolution (adaptation, release). In flavour research, TI is a powerful technique if simultaneously combined with in nose -PTRMS measurements. In nose-PTRMS measures the release of the aroma compound over time (in vivo) into the nasal cavity during consumption, while at the same time the aroma intensity perception is recorded using TI by the same subject. The downside of TI is that it focusses only on one specific attribute, resulting in a higher risk of dumping effects. The dumping effect refers to the projection of sensory differences between samples, of attributes that are not being evaluated, into the evaluated attribute. For example, in beverages of similar sweetness but differing in colour, when TI is performed on sweetness, the perceived differences in colour could be projected into the taste attribute sweetness and hence difference in sweetness might  be found. These difference would not be found when colour would have been offered as an additional attribute. Dumping is caused by offering an insufficient number of attributes to the subject to be evaluated. For TI it is therefore important to minimized the risk of dumping. Another disadvantage of TI is that it is a rather time consuming method to use. The performance of this method results in TI curves, from which different paraments can be extracted. • Imax; maximum intensity. • tmax; the time needed after which the maximum intensity has been reached (dynamic information). • Slope of increase; how fast the flavour builds up (dynamic information). • Slope of decrease; prolonging of the flavour perception during consumption (dynamic information).

Food Flavour Design - 145

Static and dynamic sensory methods for flavour assessment

The setup for the combination of TI and in nose -PTRMS measurements includes both a computer and PTRMS measuring device. The nasal headspace of the participant is continuously sampled by a small inlet in the nose, which is connected to the PTRMS. The sampled amounts are small and therefore as sumed to not affect the flavour perception of the participant during the analysis. The PTRMS measures the concentration of the flavour compound in the nasal cavity over time. At the same time on the computer, the participant performs the TI evaluation. The participant continuously scores the perceived flavour intensity by moving the indicator mark on a line scale. This line scale represents the perceived flavour intensity and is in anchored one side by low and the other side by high intensity.

TI can, for example, be used to compare the sweetness profile of different sweeteners. Different sweeteners, also called sweetening agents, differ in their sweetness delivery over time. The sweetness delivery refers to the time period over which the partic ipant perceives the sweet taste of the sweetening agent. Different sweetening agents might all reach a similar maximum intensity, so it is relatively easy to mimic the maximum sweetness intensity of i.e. a sucrose solution (sucrose is the gold standard whe n it comes to

Food Flavour Design - 146

Static and dynamic sensory methods for flavour assessment sweetness), however, it is very difficult to mimic the dynamic evolution of sweetness over time. Moreover, the duration of the sweetness delivery, and subsequent measured sweetness intensity, can very between sweeteners. Due to differences between sweeteni ng agents in their duration of sweetness delivery, combinations of different sweeteners can be used to mimic the sweetness profile of sugar. Many sweeteners have a prolonged sweetness, so a lingering taste which is in contrast to sucrose. So often combinat ions of high intensity sweeteners are used to match the dynamic sweetness profile of sucrose (i.e. mizture of saccharin, ace-K and aspartame).

Temporal Dominance of Sensations Temporal Dominance of Sensations (TDS) is a dynamic sensory method. Compared to TI, in which only a single attributes is evaluated, in TDS multiple attributes, typically 10 attributes, are presented simultaneously and are evaluated during consumption of th e foods. This can be any combination of attributes, e.g. taste, aroma, and texture, or it can be only attributes of one modality (only flavour, only texture) depending on the research question. Conclusions can only be made on the basis of those attributes included in the analysis. Additionally, TDS is not a measure of the intensity of an attribute. The underlying idea that is used for TDS, is that perception changes over time (attack, evolution, finish). Different sensations occur next to or alongside each other during consumption. During TDS, the subject selects one attributes at the time, that is perceived as the dominant sensation, the sensation that attracts the attention the most, during consumption. This attribute remains the dominant sensation till an other attributes becomes dominant, at which point the subject selects the new dominant sensation. Only one attributes can be selected as the dominant sensation at any given moment in time by the subject. The use of TDS has been increasingly used over the past years in sensory studies. One of the applications of TDS is to link the breakdown of a product during oral processing to its sensory perception. Studying this link might result in an improved understa nding of the textural perception of foods. Besides texture, TDS has also been used for more flavour related research questions during meal/product research. Another change in the last few years, it the subjects used. At the beginning of the use of TDS, mostly trained panels

Food Flavour Design - 147

Static and dynamic sensory methods for flavour assessment were used, which has shifted towards the use of naive subjects. These naive subjects are first familiarized with the method before being subjected to the real analysis. They are provided with a definition for each attribute. The subjects should adhere to t hese definitions and example products can be used to as an illustration. However, during the real analysis, the subjects might have forgotten the definitions or select attributes intuitively. This might cause differences between subjects to the basis on wh ich they select attributes. Consequently a lower dominance rate might be obtained as a result of a decreased consensus between subjects. This error becomes more pronounced for the analysis of more advanced flavour/texture attributes. In TDS analysis, a time line is created during which the dominant sensation is recorded. This time line consists out of consecutive sections corresponding to one attribute at the time, the perceived dominant sensation. During the analysis, the subject is presented with a selection of attributes out of which one should be selected as the dominant sensation each time. The subject puts the food/sample in his/her mouth and selects the start button, after which the subject can start masticating. The subject should select the attribute, that is perceived as the dominant sensation, throughout the complete period of mastication. This attribute automatically remains selected, the dominant sensation, till the subjects perceived another dominant sensation and selects a different attributes. This process is continued till the subjects does not perceive any of the presented attributes, as being the dominant sensation, any more. At this moment, the subject selects the stop button. As a result of this process, a time line i s obtained from which the perceived dominant sensation in time can be derived per subject.

Before data analysis, the mastication period is normalized between subjects. The time axis of the time line is normalized to either 0 -1 or 0% – 100%. Hereby the time is normalized between subject on the maximum time that each subject has taken to report a dominant sensation. Furthermore, the lag time, the time needed for a subject to select a button, can be tracked. The lag time for selecting the first button is typically a few seconds. This can be taken into consideration upon observed differences between subjects or foods/samples regarding the selection of the occurrence of first dominant sensation. However, the lag phase is not a limitation for the use of TDS.

Food Flavour Design - 148

Static and dynamic sensory methods for flavour assessment One the time line, the consecutive sections are often indicated with a colour. Each colour corresponds to a different attribute. The order and length of these coloured sections differs between subjects. Therefore, each subject produces his/her own specific time line. Using these time lines, it is possible to focus in the perceived dominance of one attribute. This specific attributes is perceived as the dominant sensation differently between subjects and therefore has a different location, moment in time, and duration on the different time lines. By combining the different time lines, the dominate rate over time can be calculated per individual attribute. The dominant rate is the sum of the amount of subjects that have selected that specific attribute as the dominant sensation at a moment in time. The dominant rate is expressed as a percentage, the amount of subjects in the entire panel who perceived an attribute as dominant at a given moment during consumption. This summation can be transformed into a graph, which shows the evolution of the specific attribute over time. The peak of the graph indicates agreement between subjects regarding the choice of a specific attribute as being the dominant sensation at that moment in time. This data analysis method can, in  parallel, be performed for each attribute separately. By combining the graphs for the different attributes into one, it can be visualized which attribute is perceived as the dominant sensation over time for the tested food/sample. For the data analysis, a certain significance value is used, a certain dominance rate. Above this significant value, a significant panel agreement is reached. Attribute graphs of which the maximum rises above this significant value, indicate a significantly perceived dominance for that specific attribute at that moment in time. Only the parts of the graphs that rise above the significance value should be focused on.

Figure 53 Compiling a dominance curve. An example for the use of TDS is the analysis of cheese flavour profiles. A group of 64 naive subjects was tasked with evaluating the flavour of different cheeses, using both taste and flavour attributes. The dominance rate graph, including all attributes, was standardized for time from 0 – 1 and differed between the cheeses. All graph parts below the significance level can be ignored during further analysis. Focusing on the graph parts above the significance level, the cheeses differed in flavour profile.

Food Flavour Design - 149

Static and dynamic sensory methods for flavour assessment

References Lawless and Heymann; Sensory Evaluation of Food: Principles and Practices (2nd edition, 2010, ISSN 1572-0330; ISBN 978-1-4419-6487-8) Kozlowska et al. Food Quality and Preference. 2003; 14 (8):653-661. Thomas-Danguin et al. Rhinology. 2003;41(3):142-51. Thomas et al. Food Quality and Preference. 2015; 40:365-375. Foster et al. Journal of Food Science. 2011; 76(2):R49-R61.

Food Flavour Design - 150