Static and dynamic flavour analytics – methodologies for key aroma compounds identification and quantification 4.2 Static and dynamic flavour analytics – methodologies for key aroma compounds identification and quantification By Catrienus de Jong (WFBR)

Learning objectives • How to isolate the flavour compounds from the product • How to measure the key-aroma/taste compounds (apparatus) • How to interpret the results obtained (Odour threshold, OAV) • How to use in vivo (with human subjects) techniques to measure dynamics, cross modal interactions and search for applicable solutions and innovations

Introduction Flavour perception is a complex field of study. The total flavour perception arises from cross modal interactions between aroma, taste, sound, vision, texture and mouth feel. In flavour analytics, the importance of each aroma compound in the food should be considered. Not all volatile compounds in the food directly contribute to the flavour and the threshold of each volatile should be taken into account. Flavour analytics also plays a role in relation to changes in flavour, for example during storage (shelf -life). It addresses the manipulation/optimization of the flavour and the improvement of the quality and liking of a product. The first phase in flavour analytics is the definition phase, during which sensory methods are often used. Using naive subjects or a trained panel, different product formulation can be evaluated. The results from this evaluation, e.g. off-flavour or not creamy enough, are used as a base for flavour analytics. During the second phase, the (flavour) analytical part, the compounds are analysed with different methods including the in vivo measurements. In this phase, the importance and contribution of certain compounds to the flavour profile is investigated. Based on these insights, further research can be executed to optimize or design new products on laboratory scale (3. understanding) and finally continue from laboratory to pilot scale (4. delivery). Processes involved could be fermentation, reformulation, or diffrent processing steps. The outcome will be judged by sensory evaluation or analysed with the flavour analytical tools, causing a circular approach.

Isolation the flavour compounds from the product General characteristics of volatile aroma compounds are their low boiling point and limited solubility in water. Compared to taste compounds, these volatiles can already be present in a product at very low concentrations and have a major contribution to th e overall flavour profile (flavour = aroma + taste). The product matrix, including water, fat/oil, proteins, fibre, sugar, mineral, etc., effects the perception of the product. Due to the low concentrations of the volatile aroma compounds, their isolation is more complex. Several methods can be used for the isolation of volatiles, including (dynamic) headspace, solvent

Food Flavour Design - 151

Static and dynamic flavour analytics – methodologies for key aroma compounds identification and quantification extraction, (high vacuum) distillation and sorption extraction. These obtained aroma extracts are then analysed with analytical techniques like gas chromatography (GC) and Mass Spectrometry (MS).

Static headspace is a relatively fast and simple analysis method that can be performed on a large number of samples at the same time. Static headspace analysis makes use of the equilibrium of a compound between the solution and the gas phase. If this equilibrium is known, upon analysis of the gas phase the concentration in the solution can be directly derived. The equilibrium is defined by a selection of equations. • Equation 1: Partitioning Coefficient (K) = C s/Cg. Cs is the concentration of the compound in the solution and Cg is the concentration of the compound in the gas phase. • Equation 2: Phase ratio (β) = V g/Vs. Vg is the volume of the gas phase and V s is the volume of the solution/sample. • Equation 3: C g = Co/(K+ β). C g is the concentration of the compound in the gas phase, C o is the concentration of the compound that was originally present in the sample. The higher the concentration of the volatile compound in the gas phase, the more sensitive the measurement with GC(MS) is. The concentration in the gas phase can be influenced by changing the partitioning coefficient or phase ratio. Equation 3 is one of the key relationships in the equilibrium headspace sampling. Inside the vial used for headspace analysis, an increase in sample volume is accompanied by a decrease in headspace volume, consequently resulting in a reduction of the phase  ratio. Decreasing the phase ratio will increase the concentration of all compounds in the headspace phase. The partition coefficient can be affected by temperature. Increasing the temperature will decrease the partitioning coefficient, resulting in an increased concentration of the compound in the headspace. However, a temperature increase could also start undesired reactions (e.g. Maillard reactions) or cause other sample matrix components to go into the headspace, thereby risking a pressure increase inside the vial. This increased pressure could affect the sampling process and in extreme cases even cause leakage or breakage. In case both the partitioning coefficient and phase ratio are kept consistent between samples and calibration

Food Flavour Design - 152

Static and dynamic flavour analytics – methodologies for key aroma compounds identification and quantification mixtures, the concentration of a compound in the headspace, the chromatographic peak area, is directly proportional to its concentration in the sample prior to analysis (Co). Equation 3 can also be used to predict the impact of changing the partitioning coefficient and/or phase ratio on the observed chromatographic peak size. The original concentration of the compound in the sample can either be calculated by equation 3 or using a calibration curve. The calibration curve is used for most isolation techniques. For the calibration curve, known concentrations of the compound are a dded, which are used to calculate the concentration in the sample. The volatiles are generally present in low concentrations. Besides the static headspace analysis, dynamic headspace analysis can be used to analyse the concentration of a compound in the headspace of a vial. During dynamic headspace analysis, a purge gas is let into the vial and takes the headspace along. The purg e gas with headspace passes through a water condenser after which adsorption takes place on a tube filled with an adsorption material e.g. tenax. After this extraction and subsequent concentration step, compounds can be desorbed again for GC analysis by he at (thermal desorption unit). Due to the continuous flow of the purge solvent and re -establishment of the compound equilibrium in the vial, more of the compound will be adsorbed onto the sorbent, causing a build -up and increased concentration of compound to be measured. The measurable compound concentration in dynamic headspace is higher compared to static headspace analysis. Dynamic headspace analysis has a higher sensitivity compared to static headspace analysis due to the concentration build up during adsorption. It can be considered as multiple headspaces. Next to the static and dynamic headspace analysis techniques, Solid Phase Micro Extraction (SPME/SPDE) can be used to measure the concentration of a volatile compound. In SPME a special injection needle is used. A retractable fibre is included on the inside of the injection needle. The needle is inserted though the lid of the vial into the headspace. Inside the vial the compound is in equilibrium between the solution and the headspace. Inside the headspace, the retractable fibre is ejected from the injection needle. Adsorption of the volatile compound takes place onto the fibre. After a certain period of time, the fibre is retracted and the needle pulled out of the vial. The needle with ejected fibre is put into a hot GC injector or desorption oven. The volatile compound will desorb from the fibre and directly go into a GC. In SPME the compound is more concentrated compared to static headspace analysis due to the exclusion of introduced gas and because of an higher compound concentration caused by adsorption.   The SPME fibre can also be placed into the solution and adsorb compounds directly from the solution instead from the headspace. This is only possible when you analyse volatiles in a clean solution like for example water without sugar, oils or proteins, because non volatiles should not be introduced in the GC. Furthermore, Stir Bar Sorbent Extraction (SBSE) could be used for flavour isolation. The used stir bar contains an adsorption layer. This stir bar can be submerged into the solution inside the vial. The compound in the solvent will establish an equilibrium  between its concentration in the solution and adsorbed concentration on the stir bar. Besides submerging the stir bar in the solvent, the stir bar can also be placed into the headspace, headspace sorbent extraction (HSSE). HSSE has a similar setup and principle as SPME. In comparison with SPME the stir bars can be cleaned before by washing down them, with for example

Food Flavour Design - 153

Static and dynamic flavour analytics – methodologies for key aroma compounds identification and quantification water, before they are placed in the desorption unit (= the solution). SBSE cannot directly be used in for example a vegetable oil.

In static and dynamic headspace analysis there is an equilibrium between the concentration of the compound in the solution/sample and the headspace. In SPME there is an equilibrium between the concentration of the compound in the solution/sample, the conce ntration of the compound in the headspace and the adsorbed concentration of the compound onto the fibre. In SBSE there is either an equilibrium between the concentration of the compound in the solution/sample and the adsorbed concentration of the compound onto the stir bar, or similarly to SPME there is an equilibrium between the concentration of the compound in the solution/sample, the concentration of the compound in the headspace and the adsorbed concentration of the compound onto the stir bar. The stir bar is more sensitive compared to the fibre, a higher concentration of the compound can absorb onto the stir bar due to its higher surface area. Static headspace, dynamic headspace, SPME and SBSE are relative fast extraction techniques. Other extraction technique used for isolation purposes are solvent extraction and (steam/vacuum) distillation. Solvent extraction is a simple technique in which a solvent is used to extract the compound from, for example, a aqueous solution. Extraction can also be performed with steam distillation. The Lickens Nickerson technique is a combination of solvent extract ion and steam distillation, which is often used in flavour research. Steam distillation, however, uses high temperatures (> 80 -100˚C) and is therefore prone to the occurrence of Maillard reactions. The Solvent-Assisted Flavour Extraction (SAFE) technique is a more commonly used isolation method these days. The whole SAFE system is subjected to a high vacuum. The setup of the system has two sides. One side is warm, 30 -40˚C, and the other side is cold,  submerged in liquid nitrogen. The sample to be analysed is located on the warm side in a dropping funnel. The sample will drip slowly into the round bottom flask, which is submerged in a water bath, beneath the dripping funnel. Due to the heat from the water bath and applied vacuum, the volatile compound(s) will migrate into the headspace inside the flask. From the headspace, the volatiles will move upwards, after which they descend into the flask on the cold side. This flask is submerged in liquid nitrogen, causing the volatiles and some evaporated solvent to freeze.

Food Flavour Design - 154

Static and dynamic flavour analytics – methodologies for key aroma compounds identification and quantification By freezing, the volatiles are removed from the headspace. On the warm side, an equilibrium between the concentration of the volatile in the solvent and the headspace is continuously established, causing a continuous flow of volatiles towards the cold side. This causes a build-up of frozen volatile compounds on the cold side. On the warm side, the volatile compounds with high boiling point will remain inside the solvent. The SAFE technique is an important technique for isolation of volatiles due to its comb ination of high vacuum and relatively low temperatures. This minimizes the chance of Maillard reactions.

Performing an extraction can result in differences in the extracted concentration of a compound between methods. Extraction based on headspace, adsorbent or distillation all have their own compound specific extraction efficiency. These different extraction efficiencies give rise to different extraction profiles. Each isolation method has its own specific extraction profile, including the apparent concentration of the different compounds, after extraction.  In the example shown for a reconstituted sheep milk  , SAFE has relatively more acids, sulphur compounds and terpenes in its extraction profile. The extraction profile of SBSE mainly consists of acids and lactones. SPME and HSSE both use headspace as a basis for the extraction. The extraction profile of SPM E and HSSE show similarities for the apparent concentration of alcohols and alkanes, but differ for the other compounds. Next to the differences between methods regarding their extraction efficiency for different compound categories, the isolation methods also differ in extraction efficiency within a compound category. For example, SBSE has a higher extraction efficiency compared to SAFE for the extraction of a variety of lactones. Using SPME or HSSE, headspace based extraction methods, the extraction efficiency of these same lactones will almost be zero. The extraction efficiency is product specific and therefore the differences shown in the reconstituted sheep milk example are not representable for other product matrices. For each extraction method, the extraction efficiency should be taken into account during data analysis. Each extraction method will result in a different extraction profile, which is method specific. Certain compounds might not be extracted or have a different apparent concentration after extraction based on the

Food Flavour Design - 155

Static and dynamic flavour analytics – methodologies for key aroma compounds identification and quantification method used. Proper understanding of the used extraction method is needed to prevent mis interpretation of the data. Therefore, the isolation method should be carefully chosen based on the research question, because the choice of extraction method will influence the outcome of your research. The apparent concentration of the compounds can be determined using a calibration curve. This calibration curve is method specific and can therefore be directly used to determine the concentration of the different compounds after extraction. Using a calibr ation curves is important to obtain the correct values for the extracted concentrations of the compounds and to subsequently use these values to formulate conclusions.

The concentration of compound in the headspace can be increased by either decreasing the partitioning coefficient or phase ratio. The partitioning coefficient can be decreased by increasing the temperature or changing the ionic strength, e.g. addition of salt. The increased concentration of ions in the solution causes the volatiles to migrate into the headspace. The phase ratio can be decreased by increasing the sample volume. Headspace based extraction methods are relatively simple, fast, cheap and performed with minimal human assistance (automation). These type of methods can be used to extract volatile compounds, to include low sample volumes and perform off -line sampling. Th e disadvantages of these type of methods are their relatively low recovery values for the volatile compounds after extraction and difficulties to extract low concentration of volatiles with a low odour threshold. The advantage of distillation techniques is their relatively high recovery values for compounds that are less volatile, after extraction. The SAFE generally has the highest recovery values for most compounds. However, not for all compounds, e.g. lactones. Another advantage of distillation techniques is the possibility to perform multiple injections/extractions on one sample solution, compared to headspace techniques in which a new sample is needed for each separate analysis. Additionally, the obtained extra ct can be concentrated further. The disadvantages of SAFE, and other distillation methods, is that these methods are more laborious, more prone to contamination, and not able to extract compounds that are more volatile.

Food Flavour Design - 156

Static and dynamic flavour analytics – methodologies for key aroma compounds identification and quantification Measure/analyse the key-aroma/taste compounds (machines) After the isolation methods, with which the volatile compounds are extracted, the extracts will be analysed. These analyses are most often performed using Gas Chromatography (GC). The volatile are injected into the GC and will travel through a column. Insi de the column there is a stationary  phase. The volatile compounds injected will be transported through the column by an inert gas (mobile phase), The volatile nature and polarity of the volatile compounds in the sample will determine their affinity for the  stationary phase. Due to differences between affinity for the stationary phase between compounds, the compounds will travel through the column at different rates. These different rates will separate the different volatile compounds inside to column, causi ng them to elute from the column separately. This separation of compounds makes it possible to detect and analyse the different volatiles individually. In flavour research it is not always possible to separate all flavour compounds using one column. To obt ain separation, it is possible to use two consecutive columns in the GC. The second column will provide an improved separation of the volatile compounds. This is called two dimensional gas chromatography (2C-GC). GC is always combined with a detector. These detectors can be general, detection of a large variety of volatile compounds, or more specific, detection of a selection of specific volatile compounds. These specific detectors will only give a signal if the sp ecific compound(s) are present. Mass Spectrometry (MS), is the detector more commonly used in combination with GC.

The data obtained from a GC -detector combination is shown in a gas chromatogram (retention time vs detection intensity). On this chromatogram, peaks can be observed that correspond to a certain volatile compound. These peaks have a different intensity (pea k height/area) and elution time. To identify key aroma compounds, the GC-detector analysis could be combined with sniffing (olfaction) (GC/O). In case of odours and aromas, a human nose could also function as detector, olfactometry. Instead of connecting the GC column to a detection device, the GC column is left open and at the end of the column a subject smells the eluting volatile compounds. During olfactory analysis, the subjects is asked to push a button upon smell perception. This could be general smel l perception or specific smell perception (e.g. targeting off flavour descriptions perceived at sensory evaluation). In GC/O analysis, consecutive dilution of the same

Food Flavour Design - 157

Static and dynamic flavour analytics – methodologies for key aroma compounds identification and quantification sample are injected into the GC. With increasing dilution factor, less odours will be detected in the sample. After the final dilution, a selection of aroma compounds remained detectable in the sample. These compounds can be defined as the key-aroma compounds of a product. A connection could be made between these still detectable odours and the observed peaks in the gas chromatogram. These detected odours could correspond to either large or small peaks of the chromatogram. This supports the fact that the concentration of the volatile compound is not the determining factor for the odour intensity.

An example of the GC/O analysis of a lychee is given. The combined data of GC -O and GC-MS could be presented in a two sided graph. The upper side of the graph, above the x-axis, shows the GC-MS response, and the down side of the graph, below the x -axis shows the number of dilutions where the odour was still detectable. The GC-MS response is presented with a chromatogram, the GC-O response is presented by the maximum dilution factor at which the volatile compound is still detectable. For example, a 1000 x dilution of the sample still allowed detectability of the cooked potato aroma.

Food Flavour Design - 158

Static and dynamic flavour analytics – methodologies for key aroma compounds identification and quantification The combination of GC -MS and GC -O can also be used to detect and identify off -flavours. The subject should push the button when the off-flavour, or any flavour comparable to the off-flavour, is perceived. In coffee, for example, earthy, cork-taint and mouldy were the aroma compounds identified in relation to the mouldy off-flavour. By connecting the perceived aroma to the chromatogram, the origin of the mouldy offflavour could be investigated, e.g. microbial, incorrect coffee beans, insufficient processing method.

Each aroma compound has its corresponding Odour Threshold Value (ODT). The ODT of compound depends on the matrix cq product. In the table the ODT of some aroma compounds are given in water. Ethanol has a relatively high ODT of 100 mg/L in water. This means that ethanol can only be perceived by smell if at least an ethanol concentration of 100 mg/L is present in the sample. 1 -p-Menthene-8-thiol has a relatively low ODT of 0.00000002 mg/L. This means that a much lower concentration of 1-p-Menthene-8thiol can be present in the sample, compared to ethanol, to already generate an odour.

The Odour Activity Value (OAV) indicates to importance of a certain aroma compound in a product. The OAV represents the ratio of the concentration of a specific aroma compound over the ODT. If the OAV of

Food Flavour Design - 159

Static and dynamic flavour analytics – methodologies for key aroma compounds identification and quantification a compound is above 1, so the concentration in the sample is higher than the ODT, the compounds is perceivable and contributes to the smell of the product. If the OAV of a compound is below 1, so the concentration in the sample is lower than the ODT, the compounds may be unperceivable. However, it does not mean that OAV’s lower than 1 are completely irrelevant. They may also play a role in supporting the overall flavour but still the ones above 1 are most relevant for the overall flavour perception.

The MS measurement results in a signal and compound identification. Each peak in the MS spectrum corresponds to a specific compound and the peak area is an indication for the compound concentration/intensity. Each peak has a specific spectrum, which is use d for compound identification. In MS, individual compounds are ionized. Subsequently, the formed ions are accelerated in a magnetic field. In this magnetic field the ions are subjected to the Lorentz force, causing the ions to accelerate in a circular orbit, resulting in a bend in the ion trajectory. By changing the intensity of the electric field, the different ions are guided though the magnetic field independently. Ion separation is based on the mass -to-charge ration (m/z) of the compounds. Due to the se paration caused by the different electric field intensities, the ions will reach the detector separately. In the MS spectrum, the intensity of the signal is plotted against the m/z value of the ion. There are two types of ionizations used for aroma compounds in MS. Electron Impact (EI) ionization uses an electron beam to ionize the compounds. Inside the EI chamber a cathode is put under high vacuum and subjected to a current. This will lead to the emission of electrons from the cathode which are accelerated to the anode on the other side of the chamber. These accelerated elections form an electron beam. The gas stream from the GC, containing the volatile compounds, it let into the chamber. Inside the c hamber, the volatile compounds collide with the electrons, causing the compounds to ionize and fall into fragments. Each compound, upon collision with electrons in the chamber, will always fall apart into the same fragments, resulting in the same mass spectrum. Due to this compound specific mass spectrum, it is possible to build a library that can be used for compound recognition. Next to EI ionization, Proton Transfer (PTR) ionization could to be combined with MS. In PTR, the compound does not fall into fragments upon ionization. The proton transfer is performed using the cation

Food Flavour Design - 160

Static and dynamic flavour analytics – methodologies for key aroma compounds identification and quantification of water, H3O. The ionization of the volatile compound it required for the compound to pass through the ion filter, a magnetic tube. All compounds that have not been ionized are pumped away by a vacuum. After the ion filter the ions will each the detector. Intact ions , composed of the original volatile compound and an added proton, will reach the detector. Due to the lack of fragmentation, no compound specific spectrum is obtained. This makes it harder to identify the different compound in a PTR-MS spectrum compared to a EIMS spectrum. PTR-MS can, however, be used to have a fast indication of the compound composition of a sample. This fast detection is achieved by using PTR -MS without a pre -separation by GC, PTR -MS is therefore also referred to as direct MS.

There are two categories of MS, high resolution MS (HRMS) and low resolution (LRMS). HRMS can measure mass more accurately than LRMS. HRMS can detect differences in mass between multiple compounds based on differences in the decimal numbers. In LRMS, these  compounds would appear to be the same, one compound, due to the presence of only one overlaying peak. In HRMS, the peaks of these compounds are independently visible because of the capability of the method to separate the compounds on their minimal differences in m/z ratio.

Food Flavour Design - 161

Static and dynamic flavour analytics – methodologies for key aroma compounds identification and quantification

Manipulating and improving flavour quality and liking For the purpose of manipulating and improving flavour quality and liking, it is important to first screen for key compounds in the product mixture. Manipulation can be used in the masking of less attractive flavour characteristics, off-flavours, of a product. Additionally, improvement of flavour quality and liking might be achieved by the enhancement of certain attractive flavour characteristics, e.g. sweetness. For manipulation and flavour improvement, understanding of aroma -aroma and aroma -taste/texture interactions is needed. Moreover, the application and consumer perception should always be considered for manipulation and flavour improvement. For these purposes, the techniques used are more subject based. Examples of such techniques are a sensory panel, GC-O (GC-snif), PTR-HRMS, olfactometry/gustometry, Olfactoscan and Composcent. In general, flavour is an attractive product quality aspect that consumer use in their purchase decision. Consumer preference of certain products is often related to flavour, rendering flavour manipulation and improvement important aspects of product development. Flavour perception is more complex than simply analysing the flavour compound composition of a food product. Flavour perception can be analysed in vivo  during product consumption. While the subject is consuming the product, the retro -nasal breath from the nose is sampled and analysed using PT R-HRMS. This type analysis is performed to identify and measure the volatile flavour compounds that have been released from the product matrix during mastication. The flavour perception of a product originates from a balanced multi-compound composition. Dynamic processes, such as changing the alcohol percentage of beer, can therefore change the flavour profile and perception of the product.

Food Flavour Design - 162

Static and dynamic flavour analytics – methodologies for key aroma compounds identification and quantification

Monitoring flavour perception and (multi) compound interactions can be analysed and studied in products using different approaches. The most straight forward approach is the use of product reformulation or recombination. In this approach a flavour compound  is added to the original product and evaluated for its masking properties by follow up sensory testing. A second approach is the use of an olfactometer. The olfactometer contains multiple flasks with different flavour compound solutions. Using a pipe, an air flow is introduced into each flaks. This air flow causes bubble formation in the flasks, resulting in the release of flavour compounds into the gas phase, the bubbles. The flavour compounds are subsequently transported out of the flask and into the nos e of the consumer or trained panellist who is performing the sensory evaluation. During consumption of a certain product, the olfactometer can be used to manipulate the subjects flavour perception. The olfactometer is connected to the nose of the subject. Through this connection, volatile flavour compounds can be transported into the nasal cavity of the subject during mastication. Due to the inclusion of many different flavour flasks in the olfactometer, different flavour compounds can consecutively or simultaneously be introduced into the subjects nasal cavity. The subject should evaluate the perception of the altered flavour profile, composed of volatile flavour compounds released during mastication and separately added flavour compounds by the olfactometer.

Food Flavour Design - 163

Static and dynamic flavour analytics – methodologies for key aroma compounds identification and quantification

The setup and technique used including the olfactometer are rather complex. The olfactometer is connected to a GC-O, of which the combination is called Olfactoscan.

The Olfactoscan is a fast dynamic in vivo screening method with panellists, which can be used to screen for natural flavour solutions regrading masking of off-flavours, enhancing positive notes, or coherency/pairing of individually delivered aroma compounds. These individually delivered aroma compounds are separated from each other by a GC, after which the aroma compounds are transported to the nose of the panellist, like GC-O. Simultaneously, the olfactometer delivers pulses of (off) flavour compounds to the nose of the human subject. The GC originated aroma compounds and olfactometer originated aroma compounds are combined at the interface before they reach the nose of the subject. At the interface, the flavour and aroma compounds are mixed and their flow is temporarily stopped. After mixing, the interface will produce 5 second pulses of the mixed compounds toward the nose of the subject. In between the 5 second pulses, there is a 30 seconds recovery time. Without the interface there would be a constant del ivery of both flavour and aroma compounds, resulting in a continuous gradual decreased capability of the subject to smell these compounds.

Food Flavour Design - 164

Static and dynamic flavour analytics – methodologies for key aroma compounds identification and quantification In case of masking, the olfactometer delivers the off flavour and the GC-O delivers the aroma compound to be assessed for its masking potential. If the subject does not smell the off flavour any more, a masking aroma compound has been found. In case of enhancing, the olfactometer delivers the flavour and the GC-O delivers the aroma compound to be assessed for its enhancing potential. If the subject perceives a higher intensity of the flavour, an enhancing aroma compound has been found.

A similar setup can for the Olfactoscan can be used evaluate the influence of certain aroma compounds on taste perception. For taste purposes, the olfactometer is replaced by a Gustometer. The Gustometer contains pumps that are comparable to those used in High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC). These pumps are used to pump the taste into the mouth of the subject. These flavour solutions can again be combined with the GC originated aroma compounds at the interface. The combination of taste solution and aroma compound is delivered to the subject, who is tasked with evaluating the perception of the mixture. In case of sweetness enhancing, a sweet solution is mixed with a variety of aroma compounds. If the subject perceives a higher sweetness intensity, a sweetness enhancing aroma compound has been found.

Food Flavour Design - 165

Static and dynamic flavour analytics – methodologies for key aroma compounds identification and quantification

Beer, including Radler, and orange juice both present the same potato off flavour during consumption. This potato off flavour is caused by the aroma compound methional, which is naturally present in both types of beverages. Using the Olfactoscan, it was fo und that the addition of low concentrations of the aroma compound octanol was able to completely mask the off flavour. Despite the off flavour still being present in the beverages, the masking compound prevents its perception. However, octanal itself has a citric flavour, resulting in the introduction of a citric flavour in the beverage. This citric flavour can be well combined with the orange juice and Radler, but is less desired in regular beer. The example presents the disadvantage to the addition of masking compound, which is that the addition of a masking compound could potentially be accompanied with the addition of its corresponding flavour. This might affect the flavour profile and perception of the food.

In most cases, a combination of flavour compounds will provide a food with its flavour profile. Combinations of flavour compounds could result in the perception of a completely different flavour. For example to combination of methional, which smells like potato, and Z -1,5 octadien-3-one, which smells like harsh geranium. Combining these two flavour compounds with concentrations of 10 ppb and 0.1 ppb,

Food Flavour Design - 166

Static and dynamic flavour analytics – methodologies for key aroma compounds identification and quantification respectively, a fishy aroma is obtained. This illustrates the contribution of each individual aroma compound to the overall flavour profile and the importance of a balance of these compounds. A disbalance of the flavour profile is the major cause for off flavour formation and perception.

Next to addition of an aroma compound, it is also possible to remove an aroma compound from the flavour profile of a product. This would make it possible to investigate the effect of specific aroma compounds on the balance and overall flavour profile and perception of a product. The Composcent is and appliance which is able to separate a certain aroma compound from the overall flavour profile of a product. The Composcent consist of an input, a GC and an output. The input of the Composcent is the headspace, with the volatile compounds, of a sample (product). Inside the column of the GC, the aroma compounds of the headspace are separated. At the end of the column, the headspace of the sample is collected in two vials, the output. One vial will contain the flav our profile without separated aroma compound, the other vial will contain the separated aroma compound.

The use of the Composcent will be illustrated on the basis of an example including infant formula. Typical off flavours related to infant formula are tallowy, painty, fishy and metallic. It is assumed that these off

Food Flavour Design - 167

Static and dynamic flavour analytics – methodologies for key aroma compounds identification and quantification flavours are the result of oxidation reactions inside the product. The oxidation reactions could give rise to the formation of certain aldehydes. It is expected that some of the aldehydes directly influence the painty off flavour. By removing these specific aldehydes, it is attempted to remove the painty off flavour from the product. The removal of these aldehydes can be visualized with the use of gas chromatograms. The original gas chromatogram of the infant formulate contains the peaks of all aroma compounds of the headspace, the gas chromatogram of the infant formula, from which the aldehydes are removed, contains the peaks of all aroma compounds except for those of the removed aldehydes, and the gas chromatogram of the removed aldehydes only contains the peaks of the removed aldehydes.

For infant formula, subjects are generally in agreement on similarities in flavour perception between batches/samples. This would indicate a somewhat constant flavour profile for infant formula. By removal of the specific aldehydes from the headspace of the infant formula, the subjects perceived a different flavour compared to the reference infant formula. This would suggest that the omission of these aldehydes directly affect/change the balance of the flavour profile of the reference infant formula.

Food Flavour Design - 168

Static and dynamic flavour analytics – methodologies for key aroma compounds identification and quantification

As was expected, by removal of this selection of specific aldehydes, the subjects did not perceive the painty flavour any more. The other infant formula related off flavours, tallowy, fishy and metallic could still be perceived. Of these off flavours, the perception of the fishy off flavour was decreased, but not removed, due to the omission of the aldehydes. From this it could be concluded that the selected and subsequently omitted aldehydes are responsible for the painty off flavour and partially for the fishy off flavour in infant formula.

No single extraction method will extract all flavour compounds, choice of isolation methods is key for the outcome of the research. The most commonly used isolation methods are the headspace, sorbent and distillation extraction techniques. It important to understand the difference between the odour threshold and the odour activity value in relation to sensory evaluation and identification of key aroma compounds. This sensory evaluation and identification can for example be performed using GC-O, in which the human nose is used as a detector. For the analysis of the extracted flavour compounds, different methods can be used including GC-MS, which is the most important method used for flavour analysis; Direct MS(PTR -MS), in which no GC is used; and 2D -GC, for w hich two GC columns are used to perform the separation. High value techniques used in flavour research, are in vivo techniques. In these techniques, subjects are combined

Food Flavour Design - 169

Static and dynamic flavour analytics – methodologies for key aroma compounds identification and quantification with other techniques, e.g. PTR -MS, Olfactoscan and Composcent, to measure flavour dynamics, to investigate cross modal interactions during oral processing and search for applicable solutions and innovations for specific flavour compounds. References Baltussen,  E.,  Sandra,  P.,  David,  F., Cramers,  C.,  (1999). Stir bar sorptive extraction (SBSE), a novel extraction technique for aqueous samples: theory and principles. Journal of   Microcolumn  11, 737–747 Burseg, K. & de Jong, C. (2009). Application of the Olfactoscan Method To Study the Ability of Saturated Aldehydes in Masking the Odor of Methional. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 57(19):9086-90 Castro, L. F., Ross, C.F., (2015). Determination of flavour compounds in beer using stir-bar sorptive extraction and solid-phase microextraction. Journal of the Institute of Brewing 121,( 2), 197 Chaintreau, A. (2001). Simultaneous distillation–extraction: from birth to maturity—review. Flavour and Fragrance 16(2) 136-148 de Jong, C., et al  (2009). Masking solution for Off- Flavours In Alcoholic Beverages: the Olfactoscan®. Conference E-Book, 32th EBC, Hamburg, 2009. de Jong, C., et al. (2016). New targeted beer Flavours via an in vivo approach combined with a micro-beer screening platform. Conference E-Book,  12th International Trends in Brewing Symposium, Gent, Belgium de Jong, C., et al. (2019). Study on the impact of individual key-compounds on the flavour perception in complex product aroma mixtures. Poster presentation C. de Jong et al. 12th Wartburg Symposium on Flavor Chemistry & Biology, Eisenach, Germany,  2019 Engel, W., Bahr, W., Schieberle, P. (1999). Solvent assisted flavour evaporation - a new and versatile technique for the careful and direct isolation of aroma compounds from complex food matrices European. Food Research and Technology v209 n3-4 (199908): 237-241 Feng, S., Huang, M., Crane, J. H., Wang, Yu. (2018). Characterization of key aroma-active compounds in lychee (Litchi chinensis Sonn.). Journal of Food and Drug Analysis, 26(2) 497-503 Flavourbase (2010). Leffingwell & Associateshttp://www.leffingwell.com/flavbase.htm Grosch, W. (1994). Determination of Potent Odourants in Foods by Aroma Extract Dilution Analysis (AEDA) and Calculation of Odour Activity Values (OAVs). Flavour and Fragrance 9(4) 147-158 High, R., Bremer, P., Kebede, B. & Eyres G. T.  (2019). Comparison of Four Extraction Techniques for the Evaluation of Volatile Compounds in Spray-Dried New Zealand Sheep Milk. Molecules, 24(10), 1917 Kim, T.H., Lee, S.M., Kim, Y.S., Kim, H.K, Oh, S. & Lee, H.J. (2003). Aroma dilution method using GC injector split ratio for volatile compounds extracted by headspace solid phase microextraction. Food Chemistry, 83, 151– 158.

Food Flavour Design - 170

Static and dynamic flavour analytics – methodologies for key aroma compounds identification and quantification Lehotay, S. J. & Hajslova, J. (2002). Application of gas chromatography in food analysis. Trends in Analytical Chemistry, 21, 686– 697. Likens, S. T., Nickerson, G. B. (1964). Am Soc Brew Chem Proc 5—13 Lopez-Blanco, M.C., Cancho-Grande, B. & Simal-Gandra, J. (2002). Comparison of solid-phase extraction and solid-phase microextraction–gas chromatography. Journal of Chromatography A, 963, 117– 123. McGill, A. S., Hardy, R., (1977). Artefact production in the Likens-Nickerson apparatus when used to extract the volatile flavorous components of cod. J. Sci. of Food Agric. 28 (1) 89-92 Nagy-Pércsi, K., & Fogarassy, C. (2019). Important Influencing and Decision Factors in Organic Food Purchasing in Hungary. Sustainability 11, 6075 Phillips, J. B., Beens, J. J. (1999). Comprehensive two-dimensional gas chromatography: a hyphenated method with strong coupling between the two dimensions. Chromatographia. 856, 331–347. Rochat, B., Kottelat, E. & McMullen, J. J. (2012). The Future Key Role of High Resolution Mass Spectrometry in LC-MS Analyses in Clinical Laboratories: A Focus on Quantitative Analysis. Bioanalysis.  4:2939-58. Sanchez-Rojas, F., Bosch-Ojeda, C., Cano-Pavón, J. M., (2009). A Review of Stir Bar Sorptive Extraction, Chromatographia 69, S79-S94 Snow, N.H. & Slack, G.C. (2002). Head space analysis in modern gas chromatography. Trends in Analytical Chemistry, 21, 608– 617. Tipler, A. (2014). An Introduction to Headspace Sampling in Gas Chromatography https://www.perkinelmer.com/PDFs/downloads/GDE_Intro_to_Headspace.pdf Wardencki, W., Michulec, M. & Curyło, J. (2004). Solid-phase microextraction in food analysis. International Journal of Food Science and Technology, 39, 703–717 Yeretzian, C., Opitz, S., Smrke, S., Wellinger, M. (2019). Coffee Volatile and Aroma Compounds – From the Green Bean to the Cup. Coffee: Production, Quality and Chemistry, Edited by Adriana Farah, The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019, Chapter 33, p  726

Food Flavour Design - 171

Static and dynamic flavour analytics – methodologies for key aroma compounds identification and quantification